Jeff Beck, guitar virtuoso who influenced generations, dead at 78

Jeff Beck, a guitar virtuoso who pushed the boundaries of blues, jazz and rock 'n' roll, influencing generations of shredders along the way and becoming known as the guitar player's guitar player, has died. He was 78.
Beck died Tuesday after "suddenly contracting bacterial meningitis," his representatives said in a statement released Wednesday.
"Jeff was such a nice person and an outstanding iconic, genius guitar player — there will never be another Jeff Beck," Tony Iommi, guitarist for Black Sabbath wrote on Twitter.
Kiss' Paul Stanley called Beck one of the all-time guitar masters: "Play on now and forever," he tweeted. His bandmate Gene Simmons wrote, "No one played guitar like Jeff."
Beck first came to prominence as a member of the Yardbirds and then went out on his own in a solo career that incorporated hard rock, jazz, funky blues and even opera. He was known for his improvising, love of harmonics and the whammy bar on his preferred guitar, the Fender Stratocaster.
"Jeff Beck is the best guitar player on the planet," Joe Perry, the lead guitarist of Aerosmith, told The New York Times in 2010. "He is head, hands and feet above all the rest of us, with the kind of talent that appears only once every generation or two."
On behalf of his family, it is with deep and profound sadness that we share the news of Jeff Beck’s passing. After suddenly contracting bacterial meningitis, he peacefully passed away yesterday. His family ask for privacy while they process this tremendous loss. <a href="https://t.co/4dvt5aGzlv">pic.twitter.com/4dvt5aGzlv</a>
Beck was among the rock-guitarist pantheon from the late '60s that included Eric Clapton, Jimmy Page and Jimi Hendrix.
Beck won eight Grammy Awards and was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice — once with the Yardbirds in 1992 and again as a solo artist in 2009. He was ranked fifth in Rolling Stone magazine's list of the "100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time."
Beck played guitar with vocalists as varied as Luciano Pavarotti, Macy Gray, Chrissie Hynde, Joss Stone, Imelda May, Cyndi Lauper, Wynonna Judd and Buddy Guy. He made two records with Rod Stewart — 1968's Truth and 1969's Beck-Ola — and one with a 64-piece orchestra, Emotion & Commotion.
"I like an element of chaos in music. That feeling is the best thing ever, as long as you don't have too much of it. It's got to be in balance. I just saw Cirque du Soleil, and it struck me as complete organized chaos," he told Guitar World in 2014. "If I could turn that into music, it's not far away from what my ultimate goal would be, which is to delight people with chaos and beauty at the same time."
His technique unique. His imaginations apparently limitless. Jeff I will miss you along with your millions of fans. Jeff Beck Rest in Peace.<a href="https://t.co/4h1DfXXmWI">https://t.co/4h1DfXXmWI</a>
Beck career highlights include joining with bassist Tim Bogert and drummer Carmine Appice to create the power trio that released Beck, Bogert and Appice in 1973, tours with Brian Wilson and Buddy Guy and a tribute album to the late guitarist Les Paul, Rock 'n' Roll Party (Honoring Les Paul).
Geoffrey Arnold Beck was born in Surrey, England, and attended Wimbledon Art College. His father was an accountant, and his mother worked in a chocolate factory.
As a boy, he built his first instrument, using a cigar box, a picture frame for the neck and string from a radio-controlled toy airplane.
He was in a few bands — including Nightshift and The Tridents — before joining the Yardbirds in 1965, replacing Clapton but only a year later giving way to Page. During his tenure, the band created the memorable singles Heart Full of Soul, I'm a Man and Shapes of Things.
Beck's first hit single was the 1967 instrumental Beck's Bolero, which featured future Led Zeppelin members Jimmy Page and John Paul Jones, and The Who drummer Keith Moon.
The Jeff Beck Group — with Stewart singing — was later booked to play the 1969 Woodstock music festival but their appearance was cancelled.
Beck later said there was unrest in the band. "I could see the end of the tunnel," he told Rolling Stone in 2010.
Beck was friends with Hendrix and they performed together. Before Hendrix, most rock guitar players concentrated on a similar style and technical vocabulary. Hendrix blew that apart. "He came along and reset all of the rules in one evening," Beck told Guitar World.
Beck teamed up with legendary producer George Martin — a.k.a. "the fifth Beatle" — to help him fashion the genre-melding, jazz-fusion classic Blow by Blow (1975) and Wired (1976). He worked with Seal on the Hendrix tribute Stone Free, created a jazz-fusion group led by synthesizer player Jan Hammer and honoured rockabilly guitarist Cliff Gallup with the album Crazy Legs. He put out Loud Hailer in 2016.
Beck's album credits include Talking Book, Stevie Wonder's landmark 1972 album. His solo on the ballad Looking For Another Pure Love won him a warm "Do it Jeff" callout from Wonder that was included on the album cut. The pair also collaborated on a demo for what became Wonder's smash hit Superstition, with Beck then using the Wonder-written Cause We've Ended As Lovers on Blow by Blow.
Beck recently completed a tour with Johnny Depp, which included a stop in Toronto in October.
Beck's career never hit the commercial highs of Clapton. A perfectionist, he preferred to make critically well-received instrumental records and left the limelight for long stretches, enjoying his time restoring vintage automobiles. He and Clapton had a tense relationship early on but became friends in later life and toured together.
According to Beck, it took four decades for that to happen "because we were all trying to be big bananas," he told Rolling Stone in 2010. "Except I didn't have the luxury of the hit songs Eric's got."
Beck is survived by his wife, Sandra.
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

