Flashback: Tie-dye rye and an early experiment with selfies

CBC's Flashback newsletter takes a biweekly look inside the CBC archives with inspiration from news headlines and what's happening at CBC. Sign up here to get it delivered straight to your inbox. 
If you're not from Winnipeg, you can be forgiven for never having heard of either KUB bread or the backstory of entrepreneurial twins Chip and Pepper Foster, who got their start selling colourful clothing out of their car at local beaches.
As CBC News reported in November, the city's "iconic" KUB bakery called it quits after almost 100 years. But like Red River cereal, which also originates from Winnipeg and has had a near-death experience, KUB is being resurrected by the Foster brothers, who were previously best known for their clothing label. 
"We used to go clubbing, now we're going KUBing," the rye saviours told CBC last week. They later experimented with a psychedelic loaf.
Here's one for the list of music documentaries you didn't know you were waiting for: Doug and the Slugs and Me, a new film coming to CBC Gem this month.
Doug Bennett was frontman of the Vancouver band, but to filmmaker Teresa Alfeld in the 1990s, he was just her best friend's dad. According to Chris Dart of CBC Arts, the movie is "a celebration of a great — albeit somewhat forgotten — Canadian band that really should be higher up in the CanRock pantheon." A 1982 CBC profile deemed Bennett "the father of paunch rock," but he was more to the band's promoter, furniture dealer Harry Hammer: "He's saying it like it is within the context of the subculture that is meaningful to him and his audience." 
Given the success of Ann-Marie MacDonald's 1996 novel Fall On Your Knees and her background as a playwright, it's a surprise that it's taken this long before a stage adaptation saw the light of day. It will play four cities in 2023.  
MacDonald's resumé also includes a role in 1987's I've Heard the Mermaids Singing, which the Toronto International Film Festival has called a "classic of queer cinema," and the play Good Night Desdemona, Good Morning Juliet.
In 1996, she told the CBC's Tina Srebotnjak how her novel began: with the title (drawn from the song O Holy Night) and a dare from her partner. "I think it was a gift from the subconscious or from the ancestors or whoever," she said.
CBC's story of the men who rushed to rescue an ice-bound moose outside Sudbury was perhaps the first feel-good tale of 2023. When a moose was similarly stuck in Newfoundland in 1985, a helicopter had to extract it.
The Texas gate is used throughout Alberta as a low-tech way to control livestock, as the CBC's Helen Pike wrote last week. The device is said to inhibit wildlife, too, but there was no stopping elk in Banff in 1998. 
Interest rates and inflation were two of the factors that led CBC to subtitle its end-of-year TV news special recapping 1982 as "The Year of Struggle." The headlines of 2022, however, may have been best captured in a Twitter poll. 
Nobody had ever thought of calling it a "selfie" when Canadian artist Michael Snow experimented with the form in Venice in 1970, as seen in a profile from a CBC-TV documentary series. Snow died Jan. 5 at the age of 94.
Add some “good” to your morning and evening.
A variety of newsletters you'll love, delivered straight to you.
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

