Farewell, Miss Canada: how the beauty pageant met its end

Miss Canada was going to have to turn in her crown.
In January 1992, the company that produced the annual beauty pageant announced the end had come.
The cost of putting on the show, which aired on the CTV network, was one factor. But the whole premise of the pageant — which was open only to unmarried women between the ages of 18 and 24 — was another.
"It may have been an acceptable way to portray Canadian women for the last 45 years," said reporter Steve Paikin. "But the Miss Canada organizers say 'not any more.'"
Thousands of women competed for the title and the winner was awarded $100,000 in prizes from sponsors.
But Cleo Productions said it was pulling the plug despite the pageant's ongoing popularity with would-be beauty queens and its high TV ratings.
"It's time to present Canadian youth in a more contemporary fashion," said company head Joseph Garwood in a statement.
The company was also having financial trouble, losing almost $500,000 on the 1991 edition of the pageant.
The producer denied that protests by feminist organizations also played a role in the contest's demise. But women's groups claimed victory, said Paikin.  
"Beauty pageants are a symbol of the exploitation and oppression of women," said Judy Rebick of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women. "The fact that advertisers are withdrawing their support is a sign that the women's movement is having a lot more influence and affecting institutions in society."
The pageant had its defenders, including 1981 Miss Canada Dominique Dufour. She argued it was a force for national unity.
"Quebec is there, there's Nova Scotia, there's Vancouver, there's British Columbia, there's Winnipeg," she said. "We're all a country together, and I think it's a nice way to show it."
Unless a new producer took on the show, said Paikin, the last Miss Canada to fulfil the unspecified duties of the role would be B.C.'s Nicole Dunsdon, winner of the 1991 competition.
"It gives me an extra drive to do a very good job and inform people what it's all about," Dunsdon said. 
Paikin said organizers at Cleo Productions said the company owed it to Dunsdon and all previous Miss Canadas to retire the crown "with dignity and grace."
The pageant was later revived by another business as Miss Canada International. 
Add some “good” to your morning and evening.
A variety of newsletters you'll love, delivered straight to you.
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

