When retailers saw their best Christmas since the start of the '80s

Finally, things were looking up for retailers.
In Decembers 1985, stores were full of people searching for Christmas gifts. And they were spending more than they had since the start of the decade.
"For retail stores, this could be the best Christmas in about five years — sales will be up about five per cent," the CBC's Alison Smith told viewers a week ahead of Christmas in 1985.
A prior recession had made Canadians reticent to spend for some time, but things seemed to be turning a corner, as parents picked up Transformers toys and shopped for other in-demand items to put under the tree that year.
"It's not just that people are buying more toys on their children's Christmas list, they started shopping earlier," Smith explained in her report from CBC's The National.
"They're buying more gifts and more expensive gifts, such as computers, electronic equipment, microwave ovens and clothes."
Alasdair McKichan of the Retail Council of Canada said the uptick in spending suggested that consumer confidence was improving.
"I means, I think, that the consumer is getting over the shock of the recessionary years," he said.
Smith said it was a trend that was apparent in various parts of the country, including in British Columbia, Alberta and also in Ontario.
"Retailers say the brighter mood of Christmas shoppers is a reflection of a general improvement in the economy," said Smith.
"They say if the unemployment rate and interest rates remain stable, next year will be even better."
Add some “good” to your morning and evening.
A variety of newsletters you'll love, delivered straight to you.
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

