When Martin Short's long TV career was just getting started

The crew over at CBC Arts has compiled a list of The 22 Artists Who Salvaged 2022, and among them is Canadian actor and comedian Martin Short for his work with Steve Martin and Selena Gomez in the Hulu series Only Murders in the Building.
On Dec. 10, Short and Martin hosted Saturday Night Live — a homecoming of sorts for the pair:  Short was a cast member in the 1980s, and Martin has been a frequent host since the 1970s. (Short has also hosted alone.)
CBC NEWS | 'Only Murders in the Building' lands Hamilton's Martin Short his 13th Emmy nomination
CBC ARTS | 7 suggestions for award show hosts who would bring the absolute most to the Oscars and beyond
Only Murders in the Building is just the latest act in Short's long TV career, which has taken him from being a player on the legendary Canadian sketch comedy series SCTV in the '80s to a judge on Canada's Got Talent in 2012, among many other credits for acting and voice work.
But before that, Short appeared on CTV's The David Steinberg Show as the character Johnny Del Bravo, a nightclub singer who couldn't sing. 
Steinberg is a Winnipeg-born comedian who had sometimes filled in for American talk show host Johnny Carson. He was guest-hosting CBC's Canada After Dark in early 1979 when he and Short reunited for the first time since Steinberg's own talk show ended in 1977. 
"I actually just left Second City," said Short. "I just left two weeks ago after being there for two years."
Watch the video below to hear Short tell an anecdote about how the fictional Del Bravo character led to a real-life misconception for a newspaper reporter who proposed a profile of him. 
Add some “good” to your morning and evening.
A variety of newsletters you'll love, delivered straight to you.
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

