When Pierre Trudeau's plans to step down didn't work out

The news came as a surprise to many, but there was even more surprising news on the horizon of Parliament Hill.
On Nov. 21, 1979, Pierre Trudeau announced that he would step down as Liberal leader. He asked party officials to arrange for a leadership convention the following year.
"There's no easy way or ideal time to leave, and there are always strong public and private reasons both for going and for staying on," said Trudeau.
"At a point and time, one simply makes the decision as to what is best."
His announcement came just a few months after an election had led to a new prime minister — namely Joe Clark, whose Progressive Conservatives had formed an ensuing minority government.
In the House of Commons, Clark expressed hope — as did the rest of the MPs in the House of Commons in the form of a unanimous motion — that Trudeau would stay on as the MP for Mount Royal "to contribute his formidable talents to Parliament and to Canada."
That's exactly what happened — Trudeau did stick around. And barely three weeks later, the Tory government fell on a confidence vote.
The election that was then triggered returned Trudeau and the Liberals to power, with a majority government. The same result sent Clark and the Progressive Conservatives back to the opposition benches.
An interesting sidebar to the news of Trudeau's resignation that didn't stick was CBC's coverage of the people who might look to succeed the longtime Liberal leader.
"Unlike his predecessors, Lester Pearson and Louis St-Laurent, Trudeau has not groomed anyone in particular to succeed him as Liberal leader," George McLean of The National told viewers.
"But there are a number of hopefuls who are standing by," McLean added. "Today's announcement caught most of them off guard and [left them] reluctant to state their plans."
Among the list of possible successors were two future prime ministers — John Turner, who ultimately would succeed Trudeau in 1984, and Jean Chrétien, who would lead the Liberals to power in 1993.
Add some “good” to your morning and evening.
A variety of newsletters you'll love, delivered straight to you.
To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities (except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer be permitted.
By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.
Join the conversation  Create account
Already have an account?
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

