Friends remember Donnie Tucker, whose accordion was the live soundtrack for downtown St. John's

Don Tucker, or Donnie to those close to him, was a staple on the streets of downtown St. John's for decades. 
Tunes from his button accordion echoed off of the buildings along Water Street for years. Through rain or shine, summer or winter, Tucker was there in front of the former Velma's restaurant doing what he loved — providing the real-life score for passersby and a chat for those who stopped. 
But to those who call the dedicated busker a friend, things are much quieter now without his presence. 
Tucker died last week. He was 65. 
"It's just a really big shock for a lot of people in the community," Amy Walsh told CBC News on Tuesday. Walsh had gotten to know Tucker over the many years from working near his everyday perch. 
"You'd sit down and just be chatting about the day, talking about some of the interesting folks you'd see. And he'd be like, 'Oh, I saw a really good dog today.'"
Tucker loved dogs, Walsh remembers, always having a bowl of water at his feet for pups to drink from while on a walk with their owners.
She said the gentle-hearted man would also often save her from parking tickets when the coin-operated meters were as much a permanent fixture as Tucker was. 
"He'd see one of them getting ready to write me a ticket and he'd be like, 'Hey, hey she's just inside running some stuff up there. She'll be down in a minute,'" said Walsh. 
"Donnie was just a good hand like that. He just loved to be nice to people and was a very friendly and social person."
Near Tucker's stomping grounds on Water Street is O'Brien's Music, which specializes in Newfoundland traditional instruments like his accordion. 
Owner Dave Rowe said he would often hear Tucker before seeing him, whether it was as the musician battled his way down the sidewalk with his trolly in tow or after he was already set up and filling the streets with tunes. 
"He was a fixture on Water Street," Rowe said Tuesday as word began to spread of Tucker's death.
"He meant a great deal [to everyone]. We have a handful of folks who come down to play downtown outdoors but Don was the only one who played button accordion, which is really kind of the flagship instrument of Newfoundland music."
Rowe said Tucker represented Newfoundland culture, especially during the tourism months.
"[He] added a lot of positive atmosphere to the street, for sure," he said.
"That was his lifestyle. That's what he wanted to do, to come down and play accordion every day."
Walsh said Tucker was one of the warmest and most friendly people among the regulars in the downtown area, describing his death as a major loss for the area. 
"It's going to be really sad now. You're going to be walking down that part of Water Street and you're not going to hear that beautiful sound of his accordion filling up the air as you're walking by," said Walsh.
"It's a really quiet area and now it's going to be really, extra quiet. It's really sad."
Read more from CBC Newfoundland and Labrador
With files from The St. John's Morning Show and Andrea McGuire
To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities (except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer be permitted.
By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.
Join the conversation  Create account
Already have an account?
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

