25 years later, passengers have vivid memories of Fredericton plane crash

It's been 25 years since a plane crashed in Fredericton, but some passengers remember it like it was yesterday.
Air Canada Flight 646 from Toronto to Fredericton crashed on Dec. 16, 1997, after its co-pilot, who was flying the plane, attempted to land when it was dark and foggy.
The plane descended left of the centre line and the co-pilot aborted the landing. 
That's when the plane stalled about 12 metres from the runway.
The right wing hit the ground first. The plane then skidded off the runway, plummeted through snow and crashed into trees. 
None of the 42 people on board, which included three crew members, died in the crash. But nine people were seriously injured.
Krista Liston said she has vivid memories of the flight, including that she was seated in 10B. 
Liston was a university student in Ontario at the time and was flying back to Fredericton to spend the holidays with her family. 
It was a late flight and Liston remembers dozing off. 
"When I woke up I didn't really have an awareness of how close we were to the ground," she said. "I really wasn't even aware that we had begun our descent. So, it was pretty jarring when we hit the ground."
She said the plane hit the ground about three times. The first hit jolted her upright and the second caused the lights in the plane to go out.  
That's when it became clear to her that this was not a typical landing. 
"There was a lot of commotion," she said. "I was very disoriented.
"I remember praying. I remember grabbing the hand of the passenger next to me."
Someone in the plane yelled for passengers to begin an emergency evacuation. 
Liston said she got up and left the plane through the emergency exit. She remembers not being able to see several rows at the front of the plane.
"I realize now it's because a tree was inside of the plane and those first four or five rows were stacked on top of each other," said Liston. "I am in a way grateful that I don't have a memory of those poor folks." 
She stepped out of the plane and into the woods. She had no idea where she was. 
Liston remembers the intense sound of the engines running, the smell of fuel and the sound of screaming from those stuck inside of the plane. 
A flight attendant handed Liston a flashlight to attempt to get help because airport staff thought the plane had been redirected to another airport due to the fog. 
"Nobody knew what was happening until a passenger ran into the airport and announced that the plane was down," she said. 
Rescue crews made their way to the scene and had to plow a path for the passengers to get back to the airport. 
Through the process, Liston said she worried about her father. She knew he was picking her up at the airport. 
"I'm emotional about it now and it's 25 years later."  
Liston, who had no injuries, said it was a special moment when she was finally able to hug her father and he knew she was safe. 
She said she has flown a lot since the incident, but that first flight back to school after the holidays was difficult. 
"It was a perfectly clear and calm flight but I had irrational fears, like that the bottom of the plane was going to fall out," she said. "That flight was very stressful and made me incredibly anxious." 
Liston said it only got easier to fly from there. 
For Jacqueline Alain of Fredericton, the anniversary of the crash brings back memories of what could have been. 
Alain worked for a non-profit organization and was required to fly to and from Toronto about four times annually for 19 years. 
She always took Air Canada's Tuesday evening flight back home to Fredericton, but on this occasion decided to go home a day early. 
"We live right near the airport and I remember laying in bed and hearing the Tuesday night flight fly over and I'm thinking, 'Oh my goodness, I'm so glad I'm already in my own bed.'" 
Alain went to work the next morning, not having heard about the crash. One of her co-workers told her about it.
"My legs just buckled because I thought that could have been me, and then I instantly thought of all the people involved and how they were affected," she said. "It was unbelievable and surreal to think that it would happen here in Fredericton."
 

Isabelle Leger is a reporter based out of Fredericton. You can reach her at isabelle.leger@cbc.ca
To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities (except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer be permitted.
By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.
Join the conversation  Create account
Already have an account?
Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON  Canada, M5W 1E6 
Toll-free (Canada only):  1-866-306-4636
It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges.
Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem.

